You
You
You
You
You
How are you?
I'm good. I'm glad you were able to join.
Yeah, I really like the earlier time now.
Okay, yeah, you will help everybody too.
Get things done earlier during the day.
Have more time for other activities.
But thank you very much for your time.
Thank you very much.
Um.
Hmm.
Hmm.
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
Hello, everyone.
Hello.
Thank you everybody.
Yeah, I thought you were not coming.
I sent you a text.
Just now.
Yeah.
Yeah, thanks. Thanks for joining in.
So we have so far.
13 participants.
I have a student that has been emailing me that he's not able to join.
I don't know.
I don't know why.
Actually, there may be one problem.
I did not give the I give the start and end time as same.
So it may not be showing under the running classes, but it should be showing.
Let me see if I can change the time.
No, I don't think we can change anything in the running class.
Because the start and end time I gave us 12 GMT.
So probably we may have to send one message to all the students.
Is anyone who I can see a few more students are joining in.
So this that mean they are able to see.
Martin, can you check if you go to the online classes?
Is it showing the class under running or has it gone to the.
Completed classes.
It's still there.
It is listed as upcoming.
It is showing as upcoming.
Yeah, showing us upcoming right now.
Because for me, it is showing us.
Let me see, I'm refreshing to see what you're just just refresh.
Right.
For me, it is showing under previous.
Yes, right now, yeah, it's on the previous.
So.
At the web.
OK, it's giving me the opportunity to adjust the start time, but not the end time.
Is it giving that option to set the start time?
Yes.
If I click on area, it allows me to.
It says ignore a thing that's for the session or just adjust the start time.
But there is no.
OK, just just adjust the start time something like.
Maybe six for six 45.
That means 12 45.
Oh, no, sorry, 12 15.
Oh, but it's just OK, well.
Let me see.
12 15.
Otherwise, otherwise, what we can do is just copy the guest link.
And share it with both SL and natural clouds that if they're not able to find it, they can join you using that link.
OK, 12 15.
It's not actually, it's not letting me change that time.
Yeah, it won't because the session is ongoing.
So I'm putting the link in the chat.
So probably you can.
Share this with actually an SL class.
That they're unable to.
Yeah, just copy to them.
OK, fine.
So, so we'll start because last time also we started quite late and.
All right.
Yeah, sure.
OK, so welcome everyone.
I can see that we are total.
How many?
I can see the number now where it's gone.
OK, we are 21 minus two.
That is 19 people.
So that's OK.
So let us quickly get on to the task.
Let me first open the content that we are going to cover today.
But before that in the meantime, can what somebody like to share about week five experience?
So far, how is it going and week four also?
Anyone?
How was week four?
Because we were not able to complete everything during the week four.
Especially the logic gates part.
So anybody would like to share if they happen to go through the videos that we shared?
Yes.
So I was first confused about the logic gate circuit.
But now I understand them.
OK, OK, fine.
Did you did you see the videos that we shared?
I saw some of the story I read the instructions.
All right, perfect.
So just for the benefit of all, let me show one of the documents that we shared with you last time.
So let me share my screen first.
So since we were not able to finish everything during the last class.
So we compiled a set of few videos, which I'm sure you'll be able to find very useful if you go through them.
And that is there in the shared folder. So if you go to May 27 folder in the folder in the content folder.
We have this document topic 2.1.2 to 2.1.3, which has a list of several videos, which you may find very useful.
For example, binary to decimal conversion.
So this video will be helpful then decimal to binary decimal to hexadecimal hexadecimal to decimal hexadecimal to binary and binary to hexadecimal.
And then negative number representation binary addition and binary subtraction.
OK, these are the topics which are there in the video.
They are self explanatory.
I would suggest that since these are very important from the examinations point of view.
So please watch through these videos and maybe probably next week when we meet.
If you have already gone through the videos, it will be better if we go next week through them so that everybody can understand if there are any missing elements.
OK, could could you confirm in the chat if you went through these videos and if you are able to understand different kinds of conversion say yes.
In the chat, if you have already gone through, otherwise say no.
All of you so that we get an idea.
OK, all right.
Can you can you share or put in the in the chat the.
The attendance link because yeah, yeah, sure, sure thing.
I was I was just waiting for a few more to join. Now we have my 19 still.
But anyway, we can share the documents. So I let me share.
I share the gas link in the.
With the email, the seal, they still have issues to join.
Has anybody responded that they are not able to join?
Mambi, Dantla and populous.
Just reply that they haven't been able to join.
If I go to I don't know why they are not able to join see I'm checking it on different browser that same link.
Where I'm not logged in yet, but still it should be able to let me join.
You see, I'm trying to see they're able to join.
Are they are they all from SL class?
Populous is and Mambi. Yes, both of them are for itself.
I think this is something to do with the timing. Probably.
Yeah, one of them mentioned that one of the links and them to a class where he and somebody else was there.
Only. So I don't know what that is.
Let me check here because right now, the only one that is listed in the online class from this day is the previous, which is this one.
Nothing on comments. I don't know where they want.
Are you able to open this link?
Which I've just shared because on my computer also.
We have one more somebody has joined. I don't know through link or how, but somebody else has joined.
Can I open the link? Let me check.
Yeah, check on a different browser where you are not logged in already.
Let me copy that.
If I just click directly from the.
Yeah, from Safari. I'm going to use Safari because I was in there in Google.
Yes, I'm able to join. I'm able to join using that link.
Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Sorry.
I was able to login through the another.
You heard that sound unpleasant sound.
Well, a student wrote me that while the link.
It addresses him to the back to the canvas, but it says that he's not in the class. He's not enrolled in this class.
So maybe the link is for those who are HL and that's the problem.
Because it verifies whether a person is in the class.
But there are some SL students here, aren't they? Yeah.
Okay. Could you please.
Yes, they are also. Yeah. Yeah.
No idea why we have in this.
I think it's possible to like they try to join the.
Join into the meeting before the meeting started.
So they joined.
Meeting tried to join a meeting before the meeting sucks. It automatically creates a new meeting.
So maybe they like.
They joined the meeting to early.
Before the meeting started.
Hello.
I think that Raj was kicked out of the class.
So give me a second. We're trying to find a solution to this.
Yes.
Okay.
Okay. I'm back.
I'm sure they might be more because just 19 soon. So what should we do?
Martin, what do you suggest?
I don't know. I just text.
Send an email to the students and that we we need to look into it because.
Some of the SL students are here. He's an SL student. He's able.
He was a.
He's not able to join, but others are.
So I really don't know.
What the issue might be.
Otherwise tell the.
I mean, the link is working. It's not that the link is not working.
Maybe maybe they set up or their email.
I don't know.
Have you shared that full link? Has anybody joined using link here?
What Mr. Martin has shared?
Okay. So let me see. I'm reading something from Thomas.
Let me send them.
If you are Thomas.
Thomas, if you can do that with Pavilion, that will be very helpful.
He's.
Thomas is.
He can share his screen with our Pobillas.
So he's going to be here in class, but it's not directly connected.
I mean, it's not through his own device.
I think he's just Thomas sharing his link with him.
Okay.
But every three is an issue that's all can and so others cannot.
See the link is working.
I've just emailed it to the actual group.
They should be able to join.
I will also send it to SL group quickly.
Okay.
I did the same thing, but anyway.
Just check if the number goes beyond 23 right now.
It's showing 23.
Uh-huh, minus 23.
It's okay.
We'll share with them the.
Recording up there not able to join.
That's fine.
23.
Okay.
All right.
Okay.
So guys, today we are going to discuss some important topics.
So regarding the video, I strongly recommend that you should watch through those conversion videos.
They're pretty straightforward.
And next week, we won't have so much of content to cover because this unit is almost coming to an end.
So maybe we will just go through everything that we have covered as a part of 1.1 to 1.2.5.
That that is what we will do.
And then you will have a unit test based on all these topics in the coming weeks.
So I would strongly recommend that you should start preparing on those topics.
Okay.
So today we are going to cover some of the important stuff, which may be slightly little more difficult or complex than what we have done so far.
So let me reshare my screen.
First, we'll have a look at what we are going to cover today.
And then we will have a look at them.
So I hope you can see my screen.
So today we are going to look at describe the purpose and use of logic gates.
This we partly discussed last time.
So we'll directly jump to this one.
Julian operators and or not.
Nan or XORN X naught.
These are the logic gates, which basically are part of your syllabus.
So you need to know what these gates are.
First of all, you should be able to draw the truth table for each one of them.
And after having done that, then we will get on to a little more complex things, the truth table.
And from truth table, how can we develop the Boolean expressions and from Boolean expressions?
How can we develop the truth table?
Then we will also talk one very important topic that is K maps and algebraic simplification to simplify output expressions.
And then use of standard gate symbols for and or not, none or XORN X NOR gates.
And to use them to draw diagrammatically to produce the outputs combination of these gates to perform more complex logical operations.
And Boolean algebra rules to simplify complex logic diagrams and expressions.
This is what we are planning to cover today.
Now, from your reading can would somebody like to share what you mean by logic gates?
What are logic gates used for?
Are they created by connecting transistors in a way?
So let's say follow or adhere to logical rules?
Yeah.
Right.
And they used to simplify thinking and kind of just being connected to do more complex tasks.
Yeah, correct.
So any digital circuitry comprises of the logic gates which actually takes the electrical pulses either in the on state or off state.
And based on the nature of nature of logic gates, it delivers certain kind of output.
And with those several combinations of logic gates is the computer able to perform any kind of data that we send it to it.
Whether it's a mathematical arithmetic operations or it's a logical decision making or any kind of operations.
So logic gates are the building blocks for any digital circuitry.
Right.
So this document we have prepared for today's lesson which is there in the content lesson with the title 1.2.3 to 1.1.5.
So it will it will be good for you that in addition to what you study on the palm of your platform.
It will be good if you can just go through this also.
So logic gates are the basic building blocks of digital circuitry found in all computers and electronic systems.
Like for example, a security door opens only when both the passwords and key key cards are verified.
This uses AND gate.
So think about a scenario where you have a security alarm system which will turn on on the basis of two inputs and both the inputs have to be true.
That means in order to make that alarm system work you will be needing an AND gate that there are two inputs.
There are two possible inputs only when both the inputs are true is that the alarm will produce sound right.
So similarly depending on the nature of what is the outcome that you want to get from the digital circuitry.
There could be one single logic gate which could be doing the work for example on and off switch for your electrical appliances.
So it is basically using a simple not gate which just inverses the incoming signal.
So if the incoming signal is true or on and when you turn that switch off it just reverses that so it turns into off.
And if it is off and you turn it on it gets into on.
So it depends largely on the purpose as to what your inputs are and what kind of outputs you are going to get out of it.
That is what makes a logic gate.
Now logic the basic logic gates as you can see here we have AND gate right we have OR gate which is here OR gate.
Then we have the not gate these three are called the basic gates and or and not these are called basic gates.
What's the purpose of OR gate?
How does the OR gate work?
It processes the output of one is one or two of inputs are one.
Absolutely.
So if you look at the OR gate structure the OR gate will actually give the output as one when any of the two inputs is one or both the inputs are one.
It will given off when both the inputs are false.
Okay.
Let me try share my another screen.
Can you see a whiteboard on your screen?
Can somebody confirm if you can see a whiteboard?
Yes.
I see.
Okay.
Fine.
So OR gate basically as you saw the symbol it's this kind of shape which is taking two inputs A and B and the output from an OR gate is A plus B plus is used for representing an OR gate.
Now how it works we have two inputs A and B.
The possible combinations of zeros and once in two variables is 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 and when you look at the output of this gate.
As somebody said sorry I could not see who it was that the output is one when either of the two inputs is one or both the inputs is one.
So what will be the output for the first combination?
We are passing zero and zero zero.
The second one since the second input is one so any one input needs to be one so it becomes one.
Third one is also one and the fourth one is obviously one because both are one.
This is the functionality of an OR gate.
Now coming to the next gate which is AND.
So again we have two inputs A and B which is passing through an AND gate.
So AND gate symbol is this a straight line here.
Unlike OR where we had a little curved line and this gives the output A dot B.
We represent AND with a dot so many different ways we can represent it as we can say A and B.
Sorry A and B we can say A dot B.
You can also say A cross B so any which ways it is and sometimes you will also see A B but I don't recommend that you should always have some separator in between.
Now if you look at the truth table zero zero one one zero one zero one.
The output for A dot B is one only when both the inputs are one.
It's like a multiplication so zero times zero is zero zero times one is zero one times zero is zero and one times one is one.
So this is the only time when the output is one.
That's the OR that's the AND gate.
The next gate is not which just takes one input.
It is represented by this.
This is the symbol for not gate.
If you input is A the output will be just the opposite of that A bar.
And if the input itself is A bar the output will be A so it just reverses it.
And since there is only one variable so it can take maximum two values zero and one and the output will be opposite of that which is one and zero.
Now there are many different ways to represent there are many different symbols which represents not.
It can either be just saying not A.
This is first type.
You can do A bar this is another type.
You can do A apostrophe this is the third type or you can say a till sign.
You can have a till sign A any which ways you can get it.
But in the IB exams you will mostly have either not or you will have A bar any of the two.
So be familiar with all of them.
So these are the three basic gates which we basically use in the digital circuitries but these are not the only ones.
The another gate we have is XOR gate which is this one.
So if you look at XOR gate the symbol of XOR gate is something similar to or just that there are two curved lines.
And then we have to in incoming variables which is A and B.
The output here is sorry the output here is A plus within circle B.
So plus within circle is the symbol for XOR.
Now the truth table for A XOR B is slightly different than the OR gate.
So let's write it here A XOR B.
Does anyone know what the output of XOR gate will be?
Yes.
Tell me.
0.
Yeah.
0, 1, 1.
0, yes.
The property of XOR gate is that the output will be 0 when both the inputs are identical.
Identical means both are same.
That's the time when the output of the XOR gate will be 0.
If they are unidentical that means if both the inputs are different then the output will be 1.
That's 0, 1 or 1, 0.
The output will be 1.
That's the XOR gate.
That is the case of two variable XOR gate.
If you look at the three variable XOR gate.
So let's say we have three variables, three inputs A, B, C.
The combination of 0s and 1s will be 4, 0s here and 4, 1s.
Then 2, 0s, 2, 1s, 2, 0s, 1s, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1.
Now A, XOR, B, XOR, C.
Here you have to count the number of 1s.
If the number of 1s is odd then the output will be 1.
In all other cases the output will be 0.
Again I'm repeating if the number of 1s is odd.
Out of three given inputs then the output will be 1.
In all other cases the output will be 0.
So here we have we don't have any 1s or 0.
Here the number of 1s is just 1 which is odd.
So 1 again we have 1, odd, so 1.
Here we have even number of 1s, 0, 1, 1s, it will be 0.
Then we have odd which is 1 again 0, 0 and 1.
This is the case when we have three variables.
But generally for XOR problems you will generally get only two variables.
So the principle that the output will be 1 when both the inputs are unidentical,
stands true here.
But this is just for your knowledge that if there are three inputs then you should count the number of 1s.
If they are odd the output is 1 otherwise the output is 0.
This is XOR gate.
The next gate is NAND gate.
What is the property of NAND gate?
So it's the opposite of N.
It is the opposite of N absolutely.
So we have A and B which passes through an AND gate.
This is simply AND so the output will be 1.
If this further passes through a NOT gate that becomes opposite of AND.
So this was A dot B but the output of when we pass it through NOT gate this will become A dot B whole bar.
So if A dot B is AND A dot B whole bar is a NAND.
But we don't generally use two different gates.
So this is 1.
This is 2.
We don't use 2 gates for the NAND.
It is one single gate which you can easily buy for your digital circuitry.
And it looks like symbolically it looks like this.
So we have A, B and gate and followed by a circle in the end.
And then this is A dot B whole bar.
And this is one single gate instead of two different gates.
It's not that you cannot use this way but it will simply cost you more because you are actually buying two gates which can actually be done using one gate.
So you can ask for the NAND gate which is this A dot B whole bar.
The output of this gate is just opposite of AND.
So A, B, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, A dot B whole bar will be.
Now see it's your wish if you want to do it in one step you can do it.
But generally in the IB exams what you will get is you will get a box like this.
For these kind of problems for the truth table you will get a box where they will give you the values of inputs.
And then they'll be working space and they'll be a space for final output.
This is the kind of structure that you will get in your main exams.
They will give you the values of A and B, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1.
This is the working space after this and then the final output.
The examiners would generally be giving you the score on the basis of final output.
So it doesn't matter whether you want to show the calculation but I strongly recommend that in order to avoid mistakes you should do the calculations.
Since we have to find out A dot B whole bar what I would do is first I'll find out A dot B which is 0, 0, 0, 1.
And then I will find out a positive A dot B which is 1, 1, 1, 0. This is the right way of doing it.
But even if you skip this part and if you directly write it here that's fine.
Because it's a very simple gate so you can somehow somehow derive the final output just by looking at the two inputs.
But it doesn't generally works when you have a bigger expression.
So if you have a bigger expression then I would say that utilize this empty space for your working purpose.
So that's the NAND gate. Similarly we have another gate which is NOR which is just opposite of R.
So we have A B which is passing through an OR gate.
And here we have not making it A plus B whole bar.
And again A 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, sorry.
A B 0, 1, 0, 1, A plus B whole bar will be 0, 0, 0, 0. So this will become opposite of 0 is 1.
0, 1 is 1. So opposite of this is 0. 1, 0 is 1 which is opposite of 0 and 1, 1 is again 0.
So that's the logic gate and truth table for a NOR gate.
The next we have is let's look into the subject guide what else is there we have and or not NAND NOR XOR and X NOR.
X NOR again just opposite of XOR, no sorry X NOR.
So NOR gate and X NOR has anybody read about X NOR what X NOR is?
It's the opposite of XOR.
This is the opposite of XOR yes.
So we saw in the previous example where we had XOR gate.
So which means the output will be 1 when both the inputs are same.
If the both the inputs are identical then the output will be 1 otherwise it will be so it's just opposite of XOR gate.
So it is here X NOR exclusive or XOR and X NOR output is 1 if the inputs are same using digital comparators to compare signals.
So this table actually has a little definition of each of the gates where they are used.
For example AND gate a microwave starts only if the door is closed and timer is set.
So in such a scenario you will be using an AND gate that both the conditions are be true.
So you have set the timer but your door is still open so the Microsoft microwave will not function.
It's only when both the inputs are going as true that door is closed.
The timer is on and then the Microsoft microwave will start or gate a room light turns on if either of two switches is pressed.
So you may have seen that sometimes we have a bulb controlled by two different switches.
One may maybe they are generally used near the ladder.
Near the staircase one is towards the on the ground floor and one is on the first floor.
So even when you are coming down or you're going up you have a switch.
So in such a scenario or gate may be useful either that switch is on or the other switch is on.
That is just one scenario but the scenarios could be many many different scenarios.
This is just for the explanation purpose.
A motion detector turns off lights when no motion is detected.
So a not gate could be used in scenarios where you have a CCTV camera.
Which is right now in the off state because there is no motion but it.
It senses some person's movement it will turn it to on so either off or on based on the motion of an object.
Using alarm system to check for 40 signals.
This could be a further reading for you as to how NAND gate could be useful in the alarm systems to check for 40 signals.
Then the nor gate used in reset systems to stop an operation.
Exorbit using party checking to detect errors and so on.
Right. So probably I mean more than the more than the task that these gates do.
What you will have in your exams is basically drawing the logic gate diagrams for the Boolean expressions.
That's what basically you will be expected to do.
So this is again the definition of all that 0 1 1 0 etc.
Then we have applications of these logic gates in the real world scenario.
Okay. The next part is combination of these logic gates which comes from this part combination of gates to perform more complex logical operations.
Okay. Now based on the since we haven't yet done any exams for this new syllabus but based on the past previous syllabus which also had this topic.
So the question is used to be kind of the you they will give you some Boolean expression and they will ask you to draw the logic gate.
And in that it is very important for you to know the hierarchy as to how do we define in a given Boolean expression as to what will be done first.
And that is one area where most of the students do the mistakes. Let's take an example.
Let's say we have a Boolean expression given which is.
We have a Boolean expression which is.
A plus B dot C. Okay. Now the hierarchy goes just like how it is done in mathematics equations in the bond mass rule.
So first we solve the brackets. Then we look at the multiplication.
Then we look at the addition. So that is the hierarchy which goes brackets multiplications and then the additions.
Now here since B dot C will have higher hierarchy in this expression.
So this will get the first priority. And once this is done then this output will be added to a.
So whenever you get the complex Boolean expressions which may be combination of many different operations happening.
You first find out the correct hierarchy because that is the most important part.
If you have taken up the wrong wrong combinations obviously you will not get even one mark because your final output will definitely be wrong.
So you can spend some time finding the correct hierarchy correct combinations as to what will comforts what will go second what will go third.
And then you either draw the trouble or draw the logic diagram depending on what's needed.
Now in this case since B dot C has higher priority so first we'll pass B and C.
First we'll pass B and C through an AND gate.
Now this is done already. This is done. This output is B dot C.
Once you have got the B dot C this needs to be added to A.
So which means you need one more input A and you will pass these two through an OR gate.
So this becomes A plus B dot C.
So this is the first example. Any questions for this?
Do you have any questions?
No questions? All right. Let's have a look at few more examples.
Let's say we change the same expression to A plus B and this is in bracket dot C.
How will you go about this? Anyone?
So A plus B will be.
Yeah, not drawn first.
Yeah, A plus B goes first because that's in bracket and then C goes second and these two pass through an AND gate.
And this is your A plus B bracket dot C.
So you have to be very careful about the hierarchy as to what comes first and what goes next.
Generally, you will get much larger expressions. They won't be as simple as this.
So let's take a more complex A plus B bar dot C.
This is in bracket dot B plus C bar and you will have maximum three inputs.
You won't have more than three inputs that you can be pretty sure about B plus C bar dot.
B bar. Okay.
Now, when you are finding out the hierarchy of this expression, what's the first thing that will do?
So first of all, you should just find out that which expressions will be taken up first.
So can you tell me what will be the first most thing that needs to be taken into account?
Not B times C.
Not B times C. So let's number it as number one then.
So an A plus B times C.
Then A plus B times and can you tell the reason why we are solving this first?
Because it seems a bracket because it's in the bracket.
So the first priority goes to the bracket and within bracket also we have one term which has higher priority than the other.
So that's why first we started with the bracket and within bracket we have B bar dot C which has higher priority than A plus.
So first priority goes to B bar dot C.
Now we are still in the bracket.
So second we'll go into A plus B bar dot C.
So that is number two.
After number two is done, what is the third one?
What do we do?
I B.
We multiply by B.
Okay.
Now here since this is also dot and this is also dot.
So any part can go first like you can you may try solving this first.
Okay.
And then this but it's okay.
We can go from left to right if that makes sense.
So the third priority can be this one.
So this goes number three.
Then.
Not say times not B.
Then see not C times not B that goes number four and then.
And then.
So then we add three plus four.
That means this this two will come together.
Right.
So this is the hierarchy once you have done this much.
Then you can be pretty sure that the gates are going to be correct.
The mistake comes when the students directly start making the logical diagram.
And even if you realize it at a later stage that you did a mistake,
you have to just cut off everything and redo.
So the best is using a pencil create the hierarchy of preferences.
And then you start drawing it.
So let's do it quickly.
So first we have B bar.
Now again in the examination you will be given a box.
Like this empty box.
And they will be a B and C three inputs will be given to you.
And you have to make this drawing within this box.
Okay.
Now first let's start with B bar dot C.
So we take B from here.
I'll sit through a not gate.
So this becomes B bar.
C is already coming here.
We pass them through an and gate.
This is done.
Then comes a plus B bar dot C.
So we take a and these two we pass through an or gate.
So this is our gate.
So the so the first bracket is done.
Then we multiply this output with B now.
When you are reusing one of the inputs.
You cannot take another one because you already have ABC given in the paper.
So what you will do is you will pull a line from here.
And at the point of intersection you will draw a curve and bring it like this.
Okay.
This is how you have to bring.
Now we are adding it to B.
So this will pass through and gate.
So this is one output.
Next is C bar dot B bar.
So again share the C input.
Pass it through and not gate.
So C bar dot B bar.
So B bar we already have here.
So you you can pull from here because that is already B bar.
These two are going through and gate.
And finally, the B bar other way of pulling the C form is I guess we extended.
Oh, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sorry.
It's correct, correct.
We have to pull C. That's right.
Yeah, thanks for that correction.
Yeah.
So C we have pulled and pass through not gate and then these two are passing through.
So this is number three and that is number four and these two will pass through final.
Which which gate plus so that means or gate.
It's a very small space that may look little cluttered.
But otherwise you will have enough space to draw the logic diagram.
So this is the kind of questions which you may expect during the examinations.
The most important part is yeah.
So are we allowed to modify the logic if it's the same output?
Yeah, if it is the same out no.
So you are saying that can you reduce the Boolean expression and then draw the logic diagram?
Is that what you're saying?
Yes, for example, no, no, no, you cannot do that.
You cannot do that for a simple reason that.
See, there could be many different possibilities in the simplification, right?
Now the examiner will not have all those samples of the logic gate diagrams in the mark scheme.
So they strictly go by the mark scheme and mark scheme will say give one mark for this.
Give second mark for this give third mark for this and so on.
So if you simplify even though the output may be correct,
but you you may be discredited because your output may not be similar to what's given in the mark scheme.
Unless it is said that you can simplify the Boolean expression.
You should not simplify you just go by the original logic diagram which is given to you.
No need to simplify that because simplification is also there in your course.
In case if they say that this is the Boolean expression, first you simplify it and after simplification draw the logic gate diagram,
then obviously you will have to simplify that.
But if that instruction is not given, then just stick to the original logic gate diagram which is given to you.
Sorry Boolean expression that is given to you.
Okay.
Okay.
Sometimes they also ask you to draw the logic gate diagram and also the truth table.
So let's say they have given the Boolean expression will take a simple one not so complex.
So let's take a plus b dot c plus b bar.
Okay.
Let's say this is the expression.
So you know how to draw the logic gate diagram.
So we are not repeating that.
I mean the first hierarchy would be this b dots c.
Then going from left to right first we will add it to a.
Then we'll find out the b bar and then we will add them together.
So that is the third one one two three.
Now while drawing the making the truth table, you will again follow the same principle.
So you have three inputs.
Your three inputs a b and c.
This will already be given to you.
Can somebody tell me why the combination is taken in this order?
Sorry.
Two zeros two once two zeros two once zero one zero one zero one.
Can somebody tell me why the combination is taking and taken in this order?
It just counts in binary.
One sorry.
It's count in binary correct.
It's counted in binary.
So which means if you convert them into decimal numbers zero zero zero is zero zero zero zero one is one zero one zero is two.
I don't know why it's not working.
So zero zero zero is actually zero.
If you convert this into decimal zero zero one is one.
This is two.
This is three.
This is four.
This is six this seven.
So this is going in a sequential order in the ascending order.
That's why you should always take the combinations in the same order.
Four zeros four once two zeros two once zero one zero one zero one zero one.
Now coming back to the question the question was to create the truth table for this given expression.
So first we'll find out B dot C and this will be done in the open space which you get.
So first we'll find out B C which is zero zero zero one zero zero zero one.
Next we find out plus a so add this to plus a so this and this to be added so I'll call it X let's say.
So if we add zero zero zero one one one one one.
So this part is done already now we have to add it to be bar.
So you can take another input as B bar which is opposite of that one one one zero zero one one zero zero.
And then you add them together so that will be the final output.
So you may be given a Boolean expression and they may ask you to draw the logic diagram or the truth table and you should be able to apply these laws in order to get this time.
Okay any questions from what we have discussed so far so we have talked about these different gates.
We have talked about truth tables who predict the output of a simple logic circuit.
So smaller logic circuits and construct is a assessment objective three.
So you can expect questions of three to four marks from this truth table to determine outputs from inputs for a problem description truth tables and their relationship to Boolean expression with inputs and outputs.
This we haven't done yet we will do this that how can we derive Boolean expression from the truth table so the truth table is given to you and you have to draw the Boolean expression this we have to do.
Truth tables derived from logic diagrams to aid the simplification of logical expressions.
Okay truth tables derived from logic diagrams to aid the simplification of logical expressions what is the meaning of this.
The meaning of this is you may be given a Boolean expression for example.
Let's take an example for example we have a Boolean expression A B plus B C let's say this is a Boolean expression okay.
Can we simplify this can this Boolean expression be simplified.
How. So here factorize by.
So we take B as common right and B plus sorry this is a plus C right so that means we had a dot B and plus B dot C that has been simplified to B dot a plus C which means the logic it diagram for the first one will definitely have more inputs as compared to the second one.
So in the exams they may give you not these kind of expressions but some well known expressions for example they may give you a logic it diagram for something whose output may turn out to be 0 1 1 0 which is the output for an exorget for the two possible inputs of A and B right.
So in such scenarios what you have to do is you have to solve the original expressions logic it diagram first and then you have to see that what exactly it resembles to does it resemble to a nan gate output does it resemble to a nor gate output or exorget output and that you have to say that this output can easily be achieved using a nan gate or nor gate or for that reason even exorget.
So they may give you a Boolean expressions of many different possible combinations but when you draw the truth table of that you will end up saying that it will have some output which will be relevant to one logic gates output which could be nand generally they give one of the three nand nor or exor so by looking at the output you can say that what gate it resembles to.
So that is what this one talks about true table derived for logic diagrams to aid the simplification of logical expressions.
Okay next is K map and algebraic simplification to simplify output expression but before we come to this let's first learn little bit about Boolean expressions simplification which is this one.
Boolean rules too simple yeah just to mention that we now we have 26 students okay and whenever you have a chance don't forget the attendance yeah let me do that first thanks for reminding sure.
Okay so I'm putting the link in the chat so please mark your attendance here.
I'm just seeing that is the latest list yeah okay so I'm sharing the link here in the chat.
Please could you mark your attendance.
Thank you.
20 so far 21 23 how many months you said we have today.
We have total 24 students one of you have not yet marked attendance was that I see 23 entries so far.
Who is left for the attendance please have a look at the names so you can see if your name is missing.
Okay I can show you over here so we have isa Alma look as Marco Ricardo Rossi software Thomas 24 year all done fine thank you.
Is there anyone whose name is not found because I updated the list yesterday so hopefully everybody's name should be there now in the list.
Yeah my name my name isn't there I'm in section B with Mr. Martin Adam yes okay section B welcome your name is not there.
What's your full name Adam or maybe I'll add it later.
Yeah okay yeah you have entered right that your your name is not in the list yeah yeah I've entered it there okay sure I'll do that.
Okay so let's get back to the class so bullion algebra rules to simplify so let's have a look at some of the bullion expression theorems which are actually used to reduce the bullion expression so I was going through one website.
Simplification of bullion expressions yeah that's fun minimizing bullion expressions so there are certain laws which are used to to minimize the bullion expressions.
Still there is not much of clarity from the IB side as to what kind of laws you need to learn because there are there are number of laws.
So the last update I got was that students need to just learn how to apply these bullion expression simplification laws and if there is any question about simplification then the law will be given to you in the question paper.
That's what has been told to us so far it hasn't come in written form but then that's what they told us that if there is any question related to simplification of bullion algebra and if that requires this particular law then that will be given with the question.
Okay so but however if you practice this for couple of problems I think you will automatically get familiar with what are the different laws and how to apply them.
So let's have a look at these laws one by one the first one is identity law which says does any variable multiplied with one is that variable itself.
What does that mean what does that mean when we say a.1 is always a.
So it's a and true is always a yeah correct so if we have if we have the first law a.1 is always is always a because it will depend on the value of a if a is 0 then 0.1 is 0 and if a is 1 then 1.1 is 1.
So 8.1 is always 1 the next law is null law whenever we multiply the input with 0 the output will always be 0.
That's the second law 8.0 is 0 that's a null value it doesn't matter what the value of a is because when you multiply that by 0 it will turn out to be it will turn out to be.
8.0 equal to 0 yeah correct and so that's a null law and when you add as for the null law if you add a plus 0 what will be the output always.
So 8.a plus 1 a plus 1 will always be one irrespective of the value of a with the way a 0 or a is 1 the output with always be 1.
So remember this law 8.0 this is generally used in the simplification if you end up finding an expression which has 8.0 you can consider that to be 0 and if it is a plus 1 that will always be 1.
The third one item pretend law which is a dot a equal to a a dot a will always be equal to a depending on the value of a if a 0 output will be always 0 if a is 1 output will always be 1 and a plus a is also always a.
So if both a's are 0 I mean if a 0 obviously 0 plus 0 is 0 and when a is 1 then 1 plus 1 is 1 that's item pretend law.
Again in case if there are any questions which may require this law that will be given to you in the question paper but it's always a good idea to remember them.
Then complement law complement is the opposite so a dot a bar is always 0 why is it so.
It's our one of them should be 0 and so if so a can have two possible values either 0 or 1 when a is 0 then the opposite of 0 is 1 so 0 dot 1 is 0 and when a is already 1 then 1 times 0 is again 0 so the complement law says that when a is multiplied by a bar the output will always be 0.
And a plus a bar will always be 1 so if a 0 a bar will be 1 so 0 plus 1 is 1 and if a is 1 then 1 plus 0 is again 1 that's complement law.
Then domination law a dot 0 equal to 0 and a plus 1 equal to 1 which you also saw here double negation law this is again important double negation is basically the complement of complement of a variable.
So if a then 2 bars that's a double complement law if a was 0 0 will become 1 and 1 will again become 0 so that's a complement law a dot a bar equal to 0 sorry double complement law a double bar equal to a so if a was 0 0 will become 1 and 1 will again become 0 so whatever was a will be the output of double complement.
Distributive law this is most important for the from the simplification simplification point of view a dot b plus c equal to a dot b plus a dot c so if you end up getting an expression which is a dot b plus b dot c you can apply this distributive law which is take b as common and in the bracket you have a plus c.
So when you have a value in the bracket and multiplied by another variable outside you can open it up by simply using mathematical role a dot b plus a dot c.
So it's a simple question so bracket one.
The the simplification is from bracket one to the non bracket one this will be useful you know in itself it is not simplifying actually but you when you will have combination of many different expressions within the same Boolean expression and when you open the brackets.
It may make another relationship with the other parts of the expression and ultimately it will be simplified.
Okay the next one is very very important demorgans and you can definitely expect a question from demorgans law because that's what subject guide also says there is no specific mentioning of any law but it does mention about demorgans law.
What does demorgans law state according to demorgans there are two two laws of demorgans the first law states that a dot b whole bar equal to a bar plus b bar.
This is the first law of demorgans theorem and the second one is a plus b whole bar equal to a bar dot b bar.
We must easily simplify this with the truth table let's try and see if the first law works so for doing that we can take.
We can take a b zero zero one one zero one zero one a dot b whole bar will be so a dot b zero so this becomes one this also becomes one this becomes one this becomes zero that is a dot b whole bar.
Now let's find out a bar plus b bar so a bar is opposite of a that is one one zero zero b bar is opposite of b which is one zero one zero.
And adding them together let's call it C so C will become one one one zero now this output.
And this output they are same so that mean that proves the first law of demorgans this is very very important and you can definitely expect a question from the demorgans theorem.
In the sample paper also that we have further IBDP exam IBDP computer science sample paper that has a question based on demorgans theorem.
But again if there is a question you will be given that expression of demorgans in the exam but it's always good idea to remember that.
So these are two laws of demorgans which are used in the Boolean simplification.
Then we have absorption law a dot a plus b is very simple you can see here we have a dot a dot a plus b a dot a plus b.
According to absorption law a dot a plus a dot b right so it turns out into a dot a plus a dot b and this equals to a can somebody tell how this is leading to a.
So if a zero yeah and the result of zero times something will be always zero always zero here and if it is one no matter of b it's always be one always be one absolutely so depending on the value of a whatever is the value of a will be the final output.
So if a zero if a is zero then anything multiplied by zero no matter what we have at this part will always be zero so which is a and if a is one if a is one then one multiplied by one plus b so this will always be one and this is already one dot one so which is again a.
So that is absorption law so if you ever come across a situation where your Boolean expression turns out to be like this you can just consider it as a a dot a plus b is always a.
Complementation law a dot a bar is always zero and a plus a bar is always one and then consensus theorem which is a b plus a bar c plus b c I don't think this is important from your point of view but just remember a b plus a bar c plus b c equal to a b plus a bar c but I don't think this will ever be else in the exam from the examination point of view I can tell you the laws which are important one is this absorption law.
One is de Morgan's law this is the most important distributive law double negation so these all are important except the last one.
Now let's have a look at this example simplification of the Boolean function a b plus a c whole bar plus a b bar c this is too long of an expression you won't have such a complex one you will generally have a simple one but anyway you can have a look at this as to how the simplification has happened.
So what they have done is since this is de Morgan's theorem can we apply can we apply de Morgan's theorem here a c whole bar yes yes so that will become a bar plus c bar applying the de Morgan's theorem plus a b bar c and then we have opened this up so dot a b so this as open bracket has been opened and then which law is applied here.
Which law is this a dot b c which is this one a dot b plus c ok distributive law so that law has been applied here to get a b bar c dot a b and plus a b bar dot c c and then this is a b a bar plus c bar why is this zero.
Why is this turned into zero it's b bar b bar times b b bar times b and what law is applied here b bar dot b is zero this one complementation law b bar dot b equal to zero so that law has been applied here which means b bar dot b become zero and zero multiplied by anything is zero.
So this the whole thing turns out to be a zero plus a b bar c next a b c plus a b c bar plus a bar plus c bar plus a b c bar c and then they have mentioned why it has led to this expression right.
So if you're finding it too complex I mean it can be little too overwhelming for you at this stage but honestly you won't get questions which are so difficult it will be maximum two terms and that to be the relationship or the Boolean expression will be quite visible sorry the theorem will be quite visible from that expression as to what expression can be applied so at the most it will be something like this where you can easily make a relationship.
So these kind of simplifications I think will prepare a list of you I B style of questions of the simplification and share with you you can try them to simplify using these laws.
Okay now moving on to the next topic which is this one K map and algebraic simplification to simplify output expressions has anyone studied K maps yet.
Yes okay yes okay so what what have you studied so far about came up what is came up.
Well it's a visual representation table like visual representation that allows to simplify Boolean expressions yes basically by grouping there are two methods and you group either once or zeros but I think we are relying more on once in grouping.
Right correct so see when you're designing the digital circuitry it is always a desire that we should be able to simplify the Boolean expression to the least extent possible that will not only that will not only reduce the overall size of your digital circuitry but it will also cost you less.
So if you have a long Boolean expression of let's say four different terms if somehow we can reduce that to maybe two terms so obviously your cost will be reduced and your size will also be reduced and that is what is called simplification of Boolean expressions.
Now one methods of the Boolean expression simplification is how you saw using the Boolean laws right that is one of the ways of simplifying the Boolean expressions but sometimes they are not very effective especially when the Boolean expression is very long.
It may be very time consuming and sometimes you may not be able to efficiently apply all the laws in order to get the least possible.
I mean to get the Boolean expression simplifies to lowest level sometimes you may not even be sure that what you have got is actually the smallest form of the given Boolean expression right so came up is a more simplified way of reducing the Boolean expression or simplifying the Boolean expression.
Using the visual method where you don't have to apply any Boolean law so without applying Boolean laws you will still be able to simplify the Boolean expressions okay now let's have a look at the example as to how we can do that.
This is a very nice video which I will share the link with you which is very nicely explaining the concept of K maps but let's see a few examples here if I can replicate that here.
Now there can be a K map which is either two variables or a K map which can be of three variables that is in your course.
It can be four variables it can be five variables any number of variables but in your course you have between two and three variables K maps only okay now in K map what we do is let's talk about the two variable K map first.
We have a square and since it is a two variable K map so we draw a line here the first variable is a and the second variable is B and then we divide this square into four different boxes because there are four different combinations between A and B.
The first value here could be zero the second value could be one here the first value could be zero and the first value could be one and if you want to write the values just intersect them together so this is zero zero so this is zero this is zero one so one this is one this one is one and zero that is two and this is one and one three these are the mid values for each of the cells in the K map.
Have you got how we got zero one two and three in the boxes here the this is the intersection this is the intersection this is the intersection and this is the intersection so zero zero is zero zero zero one is one one zero is two and one one is three and that is how we have got the four different combinations.
We are just trying to make out all possible inputs and what would be the corresponding output because it's a it's a two variable K map isn't it so how many combinations can be there between A and B it can be zero zero it can be zero zero right it can be zero one it can be one zero and it can be one one.
The same representation what we saw in the truth table is now being plotted into a K map format so we have taken a yeah sorry say again so we are indexing each combination exactly we are indexing each combination in the visual format.
And how we have done it that across this line we have taken A on one side and B on the other side and the two possible values for B could be zero one and two possible values for A could be zero one and if you intersect these values you will get the mid value these are called mid values for each of the cells so zero zero zero zero zero one is one one is two here and one one is sorry one zero is two and one one is three.
This will be the combination which will be used any K map of two inputs it will change slightly in the three input that we will talk about but right now let's focus on two input K map okay now.
Once we have done this let me think about a expression one second do I have any examples.
This is a new thing which is added was never the in the previous course so I'm also kind of trying to learn this came up but anyway I can just pick up some examples and explain it to you.
Let's give you a moment.
Is there a link in the document I think I have put the link to.
Yeah, I see.
Martin have you done K map before.
I'm also learning that actually yeah.
I'm just trying to look for a video which I saw this afternoon it was really very good.
Okay let me share my screen again with a video.
Let me know if you can hear the voice.
It is required to implement that function is it audible yes yes example let's say we have this Boolean expression and we want to implement it using the logic gates now this expression is in the canonical SOP form so to implement this expression we require three and gates and one or a gate.
And here we are assuming that the inputs in the true form and the complemented form are readily available but if we just minimize this expression then we can reduce the number of logic gates which is required to implement this function so in this way by simplifying the Boolean expression we can reduce the number of logic gates and after the minimization.
Let's jump to the two variables there are total four different combinations for the two variables there are total four main terms so this is how the two variable came up will look like so here the digit beside each row is the possible value of the a while the digit above each column is the possible values of the B and the combination of this a and B is represented by the each cell of this kind of map.
For in other words we can say that the each cell of this map represents the particular mean term so whenever this a and b are zero then it represents the a bar dot b bar and it is represented by this cell.
Similarly, when this a is zero and b is one then it represents the a bar dot b and the second cell represents the mean term m1 likewise when a is one and b is zero and that represents the mean term m2 and this last cell represents the mean term m3 that means each cell of the map represents the particular mean term.
And for simplicity we can also denote each cell in the number so here the numbers on the L so this is how the two variable came up will look like similarly now any question from this so far although we will come back to this once again but are you clear with the plotting of two variable came up we haven't yet simplified the expressions but we are just trying to put the possible values of zeros and once between a and b.
So a on the left side b on the right side the possible combination is the question is it is it is it is it and this is see there are two ways that the came ups are presented one is called some of products and product of sums so this is some of product.
This is not and or or gate this is just a way of simplifying a Boolean expression which is done in two different forms this form what we are looking at on the screen right now is called some of product which is called SOP form and similarly there's another one which is called product of sum and the whole objective of a Boolean expression is to reduce the expressions to the most simplified form for example if this was an expression which was given to you.
And you are asked to simplify this Boolean expression to the least possible combinations then one of the methods is to use the laws of Boolean algebra what we saw in the previous section which can be little complicated because at times we are not even sure if the expression that we have got is the most simplified one and at the same time you have to remember the laws of the Boolean algebra.
There is a better method which is called the came up which can actually be used more conveniently to simplify the Boolean expression to the least possible manner without applying the laws of Boolean algebra and this is what basically we are doing by using this came up representation where we have two variables like this example is three the expression which is given here is actually three variables right the format of and the structure of three variable came up would be slightly different.
But then what we are starting going to study first is the two variable came up so you see here the actual expression in this case was the actual expression was this A dot B dot C plus A bar dot B dot C bar plus A dot B bar dot C and after its simplification it turned down to be this which is much shorter than the previous one right this work can easily be used.
We have done using the concept of came up but this one has three variables obviously that will be covered in the next part but let's start with looking at how the two variable came up work.
So the very first thing you need to see is that since it is a two variables so we have taken A and B and here we are taking zero zero one as one combination and zero one as the other combination now by looking at the intersection.
So this is zero one which is zero zero and the Boolean binary equivalent for zero zero is zero so this first cell will be zero the second one is zero for A and one for B so zero one in decimal is one numeric one.
Now coming to the third one that is A is one and B is one so that becomes three one and one is three sorry sorry the third one the white box which is here that is one and zero.
One for A and zero for B so one zero makes it two so the value of this M2 will be two and the last cell on the bottom right is one and one which is three so that is why the values here you can see zero one two and three.
This is how the and these are called the min terms as to what is the value for each cell through the various combinations of zeros and months and later you will see how this concept can be used to simplify the Boolean expressions in order to get the most simplified version of the given Boolean expression.
This is a plotting of two variables similarly we can have a three variable came up where obviously the number of combinations will increase.
So first let's have a look at that and then we will see how we can use this to simplify look like similarly now let us see the three variable came up so for the three variables okay now here you can see that in the three variable came up we are starting a and a is fine because a single variable so we have taken a on one side and BC on the other side it could also be AB on one side and see on the other side but then that will become vertical here we have two rows in that case we will.
In that case we will have three rows if we take AB on one and see on other but the universal representation most of the books or most most of the websites that you will see will be a on one side and BC on the other side by doesn't stop you from taking AB on one side and see on the other side just the structure will change but the final outcome will be same.
So going by A and BC A on one side and BC on other side the possible values of A is zero and one because it's a single variable but the possible values of B and C is zero zero B zero C zero zero one where B zero and C is one one one where B is one and C is one and final one one zero where B is one and C is zero do you see something unusual here.
So the index index is the index yes yes which one so it's not if not zero one it's zero one zero one three sorry say again your voice is breaking what is the unusual thing you see here.
So the order correct correct so let's have a look at the min term values little later if you look at the possible combinations of zeros and ones here for BC is going zero zero zero one one one and one zero right don't you think one one should have come in the end and one zero over here that would be the right order right zero zero zero one one zero and one one.
That should have been the correct order isn't it yes or no the question is if you look at the possible combinations of B and C okay how do we generally take it we take it as ideally we should have taken it as zero zero like B zero C zero second one is zero one and then one zero and then one one to get it zero one two three.
As the min term one correct but there is a reason why one one has been taken before one zero and this is a universal principle which will be applied in all possible cases.
If you go in the simple order of zero zero zero one one zero one one that will not be able to help you to simplify the Boolean expressions and the reason for taking this particular sequence is for a simple reason that when you move between the adjacent cells.
In K map there is a great significance of adjacent cells what is adjacent cell adjacent cell is the very next cell from the current cell value.
So if I am on this first top left cell which is zero min term value zero what's the adjacent cell for zero one and one and four one and four so the cell which is very next to the current cell they are called adjacent cells.
So for this zero the adjacent cells are one which is the second one and bottom one for these two are adjacent cells similarly for three the adjacent cells are two on the right side one on the left side and seven down below right.
Now as per the principle between the adjacent cell cells you should not ideally have more than one it changing.
Okay this may sound little confusing but let's try to see through the example.
Within the adjacent cells you should have maximum one bit changing if there are two or more bits changing then that will not help you to plot the expressions in the most simplified way.
Let's see the example if we take at the zero min term okay.
When we go from zero to one how many bits are changing if you look at the combination of zero it is zero zero zero right yeah zero B zero C is zero.
So the possible combinations of ABC is zero zero zero and for the second adjacent cell which is one what is the value zero zero one two.
Sorry zero zero zero zero zero zero one how many bits are changing between the two one one only one only one bit is changing.
So this is fine now let's have a look at one two three.
Okay how many bits are changing from one two three what's the combination of one zero zero one isn't it.
Yeah yeah and what is the combination for three zero one one zero one one zero one one how many bits are changing between zero zero one and zero one one one.
One bit one bit one bit no let's replace one zero with one one with one zero let's let's try and take one zero over here instead of one one.
How many bits are changing between one and two.
From zero zero one to zero one zero how many bits are changing.
So as soon as you get a condition where two bits are changing then your simplification law is not going to work here.
That's why the placements of zeros and once is done in such a way that for every adjacent cell the maximum number of bits change should be maximum one.
Okay now to simplify things for others who have not been able to understand this or follow this just remember it that you have to take this combination.
Always take this combination whenever you have to simplify using the de Morgan's theorem zero zero zero one one one and one zero on the top and zero one to the left that is the combination if you take this combination no further justification needed.
Okay there are two from that means if you move from the one column to the so that's what this guy has talked about is changing that means these two corner cells are also adjacent.
Okay one more thing what could be what are the adjacent cells for let's say two.
For the minimum for the mint for the cell having momentum value two so you said one adjacent value is three and one is six.
Any other any other adjacent cells for two zero zero.
Why zero.
Are they not far from one another zero and two.
No no no no.
I can hear myself with the service.
There's some interference here and so I cannot properly properly.
No we can hear you we can hear you properly are you able to hear me.
Okay no problem so you you said zero is also adjacent cell for two I'm not saying it's wrong but can you tell me why.
I cannot say I'm sorry.
Okay no problem see the adjacent cells are not only those which are adjacent to one another for example for five the adjacent cells is one seven and four but if you look at the last cells extreme ends and if you wrap let's say it is on a paper and when you wrap that paper in a circular manner.
Okay right now it's a it's a flat paper but when you wrap them and make a circle then obviously this two will be joined with zero isn't it.
So you're looking at the paper in a flat format but if you wrap it okay if you make it circular then obviously this two just like a word map what we see is a what we see is a flat surface but the globe is not like that when you.
When you join the globe in the circular manner two extreme ends actually go and join with each other so therefore for for two the adjacent cells are not just three and six but it's also zero.
Right so please remember that the adjacent cells are not just the extreme adjacent I mean not just the immediate adjacent but also the extreme ends so for two.
Only these third bit is so for two the adjacent cell is even zero for six the adjacent cell is four right changing and you can apply that rule even here that the bits which are changing between adjacent cells are two extreme ends they're also only one bit is changing so any property any combination where just one bit is changing between two cells that becomes an adjacent cell.
Like take the example of zero and two how many bits are changing between zero and two zero is what zero zero zero and what is two zero one zero zero one zero how many bits are changing one big one big one bit so that means they are also adjacent cells for any other combination it will not be one bit for example six and five if you see it will not be just one bit changing but minimum two bits will be changing so they are not adjacent cell.
So the property of adjacent coming back to the main definition the property of an adjacent cell is not that what you see adjacent to each cell it's actually any two cells where the number of bits which is changing between them is maximum one and that applies to the corner or the extreme ends of the came up.
So adjacent cells are not that your I see as adjacent it's any two cell combinations where the change in number of bits between the two is one that makes it adjacent cell that is the universal definition for adjacent cell likewise as we move from the same map and in this video what we will do whatever mean terms are present in and also be given as a bar dot B bar plus a bar dot B bar.
Okay now this is one sample one this is one example where since I said it's a sum of product form so you can see here sigma sum of product SOP we will do POS also in the next lesson but right now we are just focusing on a SOP and I have to check that you have I think only SOP in your syllabus but I'll confirm and I'll let you know so some of product you can see here that the question will be given either in this form F1 equal to sigma zero one three.
What is zero one three signify this signifies that the momentum values of this to variable K math is one at these momentum values so zero one and three so zero is turned into one one is turned into one and three is turned into one what is left is zero that zero has been kept aside.
Please try to see this and ask me question if you are not clear one form of K map which is given to you in the exams or in the questions would be sigma zero one three where zero one three represents the momentum cells or indexes where the value is one.
So look at zero four plus one plus three yeah correct so zero so that mean the momentum value is
0.5.
0.5.
0.5.
Do you guys also have this interference like the repeating sound?
Yeah, I have them too.
I think it's just because he was screaming and showing his screen.
Probably with Wi-Fi or something.
Maybe.
Yeah, but it's complicated.
Let's see.
Yeah, I think when he was sharing his screen, he was sharing his audio too.
I can take over.
I can see you guys.
So we're talking about K maps so K maps it's like a great thingy I guess it's like ones and zeros on top or something.
Wait, where is Mr. Martin is he's also gone?
I'm Mr. Martin now.
I think so yeah.
No, wait, this new Mr. Martin.
Okay, proceed.
Proceed we need.
Yeah, please proceed.
So K.
Wait, can I tell me K.
What is it?
K.
K something K.
Exactly.
Yeah, K maps is derived from the word K pop right.
So K pops up like long history of K pop and like.
So if you watch like, you know, shows like K pop demon amtus K maps come out all the time.
You know, where like the ones and zeros they represent like the characters, you know, and they.
And then you hear you have like one character and then like this another character.
And yeah, K maps basically big.
That's so smart.
That's so interesting.
It's deep.
It's deep.
K maps.
It's it's just a deep topic.
This is going to be on the class recording as well.
Yeah.
This is technical.
Whatever I be curriculum.
All the people who couldn't join this class.
Well, it's beyond the itself.
Okay.
So what's actually going on?
Because like.
It's not in the.
It was like.
I don't know.
I went out.
Yeah.
It's the worst.
I don't know.
Do you just wait?
We just can go.
I want to go to see man.
It's way too early.
Way too late.
We can't wait until like five minutes.
Okay.
Overall, how are you guys?
How are you taking CS?
I mean,
it's not as my physics or math.
I mean, it's okay.
At least it's not as hard as my physics and my math.
Because I'm taking math,
a chill and physics,
a chill.
See you.
Me too.
We got tested on three topics.
We never learned.
Oh, my God.
For me, my math teacher is good.
He teaches my physics each other.
Yeah.
Like.
I think it's physics teams as a whole.
My math teacher is great.
It's just keeping up.
It's physics teachers as a whole that struggle.
Like teaching.
We say.
Is everybody here that you're taking physics and maps?
Any visual art students?
No.
Okay.
I mean, I would have loves to take visual art by a kind of visual art.
I take visual art as well.
What do you do?
Yeah.
School.
I want to start it with your art.
do we study? Uh, we just like, in like the new service, they gave us a new service. They
put it for, uh, 27 graduates. Yeah, they changed the syllabus. And then like, you can basically
do anything you want. And like, in my case, I'm doing a lot of like 3D artworks and
like that kind of stuff. But like, yeah, it's just. Yes, I am a designer. Yeah, I've seen
your comments. Can you show you? Hello, hello. Hi, no problem. Just continue, continue
documents. Sorry, I got disconnected. All right. So, okay, let me share my screen again.
Is Mr Martin also not there? Yeah, he's also not here. He's not here. Okay. Fine. Okay, so
we were here. Uh, so somebody's a microphone is on. Could you turn it off? Okay. Now we were
here. So you can see here that we, uh, one of the formats that you may get is F1 equal
to sigma 013. So what you will do is you will just plot the cells, which whose values
are are given there. So 013 is given. So look at the minterm value, which contributes to,
uh, 013. The first one is 0, the second one. I can ask this screen share. It's
in loading. Okay, one second. One second.
Can you see now? I just got back. Yeah, yes, sure. Can you see the screen now? No. No.
Perhaps we need to refine the page. It will help. Still not visible? No.
Now I can see. Now I can see. Okay. I don't know if I turned on the sound also not. Let me check
again. Share the time. I can see, right? I can. Sorry. Nothing on. Not yet. I think you need
to rejoin me. So, yeah, after I rejoined, I could see it. How many of you can't see,
uh, like, is it majority or just one or two? I also can see. Yeah, I can see. It's a work
if you refresh the page. Yes, after I refresh the page, it worked. Okay, just refresh
your page. Maybe it will work then. Please confirm so that I will continue them.
Nice. It's Sean. Yeah. Is it showing for all now? Yeah, after I refresh is waking up.
I also refresh my page and I can see it. Okay, perfect. Okay. So these are the two different formats
that you may get question on, but most likely it will be on the second format where you will be given
the expression, which is a bar dot b bar plus a bar dot b plus a dot b. Now as the first step,
what you need to do is you have to mark all those, uh, may term cells whose expressions are given
to you. For example, uh, when a is zero, that would be actually be a bar and when b is zero,
that is considered as b bar, when b is one, that is b and when a is one, that is taken as one.
Now, when I say a bar dot b bar, which of these min term values do you think is most applicable?
Hey, bar and b bar. Yeah, a bar and b bar, which, uh, min term value will you index as one?
index zero. The index zero, the index zero, the first, uh, top left that cell will be marked as one
because a zero, that means a bar and b zero, which is b bar. That is the first step. Then comes a bar
dot b, which cell do you think is a bar dot b? What is the value of a index one zero and the value
of b is one, that means index one. So that is greater as one. Then we have a and b, that means a
should also be one and b should also be one, which is this, uh, uh, the third index value.
So as a first step, you have to mark all the cells which are one, one, one, right? So either you
can be directly given those min term values like sigma zero, one, three, which is straightforward,
or otherwise they may give you the Boolean expression with either bar or without bar. So you see
which cells would be applicable. That is the first step. If you have done this correctly,
that means the chances are that you will be able to simplify the expression in the most convenient
way. Now what is the objective here? The objective is to simplify a bar dot b bar plus a bar dot b
plus a dot b to the simplest form possible. One of the methods could be using the Boolean laws.
But right now we are doing using the came up where you don't have to use any of the Boolean laws.
So this is the first step that you have plotted all the index values wherever applicable.
The next one is to make a pair of ones of the adjacent cells. That is the second step.
Okay. Now I'm saying that you have to pair all the ones which are adjacent to one another.
So which will be the pairs you can recreate from index zero from index zero to one and one correct.
So the first index will be zero and one because they are adjacent cells and both are one one.
So we will index that first. What is the second pair that you can make?
In the one index three. Very good index one and index three. Yes.
So first index. So you have to only pick up the ones just disregard zero.
So when we are picking up the ones, we will make the pair of zero and one. That is first pair.
And the second pair is one and three. As you can see, let me scroll further.
Yeah. So this is the first pair which is one index zero and index one.
So which means A bar dot B bar plus A bar dot B.
B is equal to one. That means this A bar dot B bar plus A bar dot B is equal to A bar.
So by grouping these two ones, equivalently, we will get A bar.
So now let us see how to get the same result from the A map.
Now on the left side, you can see that they have used the loss of Boolean algebra to simplify.
So A bar dot B bar plus A bar dot B, they have used one law A. A bar has been common B bar plus B.
What is B bar plus B? That is always one. One of the laws said that if we are B plus B bar,
that will always be one and one dot any value is always that value.
So we are left with A bar. That is through the simplification using the Boolean laws.
Now let's see how we can get the same output using the K map.
So from the first pair that we have created, where we have made a pair of
minimum value zero and minimum value one. Now we will get the values in such a way
that we will be left with only the value A bar and how that happens.
You when you do the pairing, whether it's a two variable K map or three variable K map.
When you do the pairing, you have to see that which value is remaining constant and which
values are changing. So we have two variables here. One is A and one is B.
For both these for both these values of the pair is A changing or A remaining zero for both of them.
A is zero for both of them because it is horizontal. So whether you look at A from the zero
min term or you look at A from one min term, the value of A stays zero. That means the A is
constant, isn't it? Now what is A actually? A is zero and if A is zero, that means it will be
represented by the variable A bar, isn't it? If A is zero, that means A will be represented as A bar.
How about is B staying same in both the cells or is it changing?
It's changing. B is zero in the first one and B is becoming one in the second one.
So if any variable whose value is changing between the given two, we just completely disregard that.
So which means when you have done the pairing, we are looking for the two variables as to which
is changing and which is not changing. If something is not changing, that is retained and something
which is changing, that will be disregarded. Since A is remaining zero in both these, so A will remain
as zero because it's not changing. So we will retain A but B is zero here and it becomes one
there. So it is changing. So we will completely disregard B. Now we will not write A because the value
of A is actually zero, which is a representation of A bar. So therefore from this pair, we just get A bar.
Have you got this? Have you understood how we are getting A bar?
Yes, first, here that we created which is index zero and index one, A remains same because we
are talking about this horizontal line for both the cells A is zero. It's not changing. Anything
which is not changing, we will retain that. So therefore A will be written as A bar because it's
a zero. If it was one, if we were on the lower row, then it would be A because A is one there.
But since we are in the upper row, which is zero, so it will be taken as A bar. But B is changing
in the first cell it is zero, in the second cell it is one, which is changing. So we will not take B,
we will remove it. So the only thing we are left with in the first case is A bar.
Now based on this, what is the second pair we can make?
Index number one and three. Now if we make one and three, can you tell me what will be the
simplified Boolean expression for between one and three? What is changing and what is remaining
constant? P is A remaining constant? No. Because in the first row, A is zero, in the second row,
A is one. So we will completely disregard A. What are we left with? B, B. Now will B, B, B,
or B bar? Plus B. Plus B because B is represented by the value one. So which means the B will be
taken as one. So the simplified expression will be A bar plus B. And that is the simplified expression
for this whole expression, which is given here. So let's see that. So if you see this group,
then this dot B and A B. So if you simplify this expression using the Boolean laws,
then we will get the B. And the same result, we can also get directly from the A map.
So if you see this group, then in this group, the variable A is changing while the variable B is
constant. So in this group, we will keep this variable B and we will ignore this variable A.
And here since the value of B is equal to one, so this group represents B. That means this group
represents A bar while this group represents B. And the overall function is the summation of A bar
B. So in this way, using the K map, we can simplify the Boolean expression without using any
Boolean laws. You saw how much simplification we did from use of two gates for A bar,
sorry, A bar one gate, B bar one gate, A bar and B two other gates and A and B. So a Boolean
expression, which comprise of six different variables, is now six different combinations,
is now turn to just A bar plus B. And if you draw the true table for this longer version of the
Boolean expression, which is given in F one there and this shorter version, which is A bar plus B,
they both will actually exactly be the same in terms of the output. So when you're making a
digital circuitry and you derive an expression that this expression will give you the desired
output, which is through A bar dot B bar plus A bar dot B plus A dot B. Your next target should
simplify this to see look at the possibility of reducing this expression to a least possible way
still to get the same output. So if your expectation was this output, the same can be achieved
using the smaller version which is A bar plus B. And you see how so simply we were able to simplify
the Boolean expression without using any laws of the Boolean algebra. So again to repeat first of
whichever format is given to you, whether sigma 013 or A bar B bar A bar B AB, you have to first come
up with the indexes whose value will be one. Next step you have to look at the possible combinations
of the pairs of the edges and cells. Once you have done these two things, then keep the variable,
which is remaining constant for the two indexes of the pair and disregard the one which is changing.
Like in the first case, A bar in the second case B and then add them together because it is
sum of products SOP. So it will be A bar plus B that is the reduced expression.
Let's have a look at the next example.
Okay in this case, the expression is A bar dot B plus A dot B bar. Can this be simplified further?
Am I still connected?
And I think you can be simplified further.
Yeah, it cannot be. Do we have any adjacent cells where the pairing can be done?
No, no. So if that is the scenario, when you don't see any possibility of a pairing because
there are no two adjacent cells which can be paired in such a scenario, the
further simplification cannot be done, which means the Boolean expression which is given to you,
that is the simplest form. You cannot go anything beyond that.
Isn't that XOR gate?
A bar dot B plus A B bar, yes, that is an XOR gate correct.
Okay, but in case of this, you cannot further simplify. So you have to get this A bar dot B plus A dot B bar.
Now let's have a look at the three variable K map. The concept is exactly the same.
It will be just the plotting of values which will slightly change. So the values which are given
to us here is sigma 015. Okay, so as a part of this, what we have done is we have marked all
those min term values as one whose values are given here. For example, 0.
This min term 1, M5, M5 and now let us try to minimize this function. So as I have discussed
earlier to minimize this function, we need to make the group of ones which are adjacent to each
other and the group should be in the power of 2. So in this case, this is the first group
and by comparing these two ones, we will get the second group and with these two groups,
all the ones in the map gets covered. So first of all, let us consider this group.
So in this group, if you see, then this variable C is changing while the variable A and B are fixed.
Therefore, for this particular group, we will consider this variable A and B and we will ignore
the variable C. Now see the difference here because we have three variables here, A, B and C.
Unlike the previous case, where we were just looking at the values of A or B in isolation,
now we are also looking at the value of C. Now if we see the first pair which is between
index 0 and index 1, the only value which is remaining same between A, B and C is 0.
So sorry, between A and B, because A is 0, B is 0 in both the cases. So that means A and B
will be retained and C will be disregarded because C is changing from 0 to 1. In the first case,
we have the value of C 0 and the value of, in the first case, the value of C 0 and in the second
case, value of C is 1. So that needs to be disregarded. What are we left with for this pair?
What do you think will be the Boolean expression for this one? A bar.
Is it A bar and what about B? B is also not changing, right? Yes, because B is also not changing,
so it will be A bar dot B bar. The actual expression for this would have been the previously,
can you tell me what was the original expression for this which we are trying to reduce?
What was the original expression? A bar, B bar, C bar, A bar, B bar, C bar, C. The original
expression was A bar, B bar, C bar, because all 0, 0, 0 and for the second cell, it was A bar,
B bar, C, which is now being reduced to A bar dot B bar. Because we are considering the values
which are staying constant, which is A, B, C is changing, so we will disregard C. Moreover,
since the value of A and B is 0, that means this group represents A bar dot B bar.
Similarly, let us see the second group. What do you think will be the expression for this one?
Second one. What is changing and what is, is A changing or not?
A is changing and? No, A is not changing, it will be B bar dot C.
Wait, but A is changing now? A is changing from 0 to 1.
0, 0, 1 and 1, 0, 1. So it is not A changing because A is 0 here and A is 1 here.
Think about it. See, the first expression is 0, 0, 1 and the second one is 1, 1.
0, 1. So A is changing. How about B?
Not changing. B is not changing and C.
Not changing. If you see, correct.
In the variable A is changing, while the variable B and C are same.
So for a column, for a column, the 0 and 1 stays the same. Like in the previous case,
the row was same, so A was not changing. But when you make a pairing of a column,
both the values of column remains 0, 1 for both the pairs. Like when you look at index 1,
then also BC is 0, 1. When you look at index 5, then also BC is 0, 1. So BC is not changing,
but A is changing between the two. And therefore, the expression for this will be B bar C.
So here, the B is 0, while C is 1. Therefore, this group represents B bar dot C.
And if you see the oral function, and the oral function is equal to A bar dot B bar,
plus B bar dot C. So the expression which was earlier,
four different expressions is now turned down to two, which is the most simplest form
without using any Boolean expression. This is the second case. Let's look at one more case.
This one. Now, here you will learn one thing new. How many pairs do you think can be made here,
can be made here of the adjacent cells? Three. Three. Okay. Anyone else?
Anyone else? How many pairs can we make of the adjacent cells to zero?
Two pairs. Okay. So we have two answers so far. One is three and one is two.
It's quite easy to see that why three came up, because yes, three pairs can be made 0,
1, 1, 5 and 5, 7. And there's a reason why there can be only two. Can you tell me it's observe why two?
Well, yeah, why would we overlap? There is no need to overlap. We can create two pairs and they
will suffice correctly. When you make the pair, you have to also see that have we covered all the
ones. If we have already covered the ones, then you don't have to redo that. Like for example,
when you do the pairing of zero and one and next you do the pairing of five and seven,
have we covered all four ones at least once? Yes. If that is done, then you don't really have to
overlap once again. Although if you overlap, you will have one extra expression. It will still be
simplified, but not to the lowest level. If you apply Boolean law into that new expression,
you will still be able to further reduce it. But if you are doing it from K-MAP,
our effort should be that without using any laws of Boolean algebra, we should be able to get
the minimum possible expression, which could give the same output. So therefore, always remember
that if all the ones are already covered, then you don't have to overlap anything, which means
zero one can be one pair and five and seven could be another pair. In that sentence, you will be
able to get the expression, which will be the most simplest one, which represents this main
term thing. So in this group, the value of EN. Okay, let's derive this. What do you think will be
the output for the first pair, which is index zero and one? What is changing and what is the
main constant? A is not changing. A is not changing and C is changing. So what will be the
expression for the first one? A bar B bar. A bar and B bar. Perfect. And how about the second pair?
So A bar C. A C. What is changing? A is not changing and C is not changing.
So which means since A is one, so it will be A and C is one, which will be C. So A bar dot B bar
plus A dot C. Well, the variable C is changing. Sorry, A bar dot B bar. The value of ENB is zero.
That means this group represents A bar dot D bar. Similarly, in this second group,
the variable A and C is not changing, while this variable B is changing. So in this group,
the value of A and C is equal to one. Therefore, this group represents A dot C.
So if you see the overall minimized function and that is equal to A bar dot B bar plus A C.
Now, some of you might have a question that can we combine this and then map?
Okay, can you try solving one problem now? Let's say we have the value sigma zero to
five seven. Can you solve that? Just use a pen and a paper and take the sigma value as
zero to five seven. Tell me the simplified Boolean expression.
Zero to five seven.
You can write your answers in the chat. Zero to five seven is the sigma value.
The class will end in just about five minutes.
So this is the last problem that I'm giving. After this, we will create one assignment
sheet for you based on KMAP, because I don't think in far more assignments, we have anything to do
with KMAPs there. So we'll create a problem statement, which you can solve and we'll let you know
how to submit that. Well, for some reason, the chat is disabled for me, but I can sell, yes,
for me at the very least. Can you try now? It's still disabled. That's very surprising.
Okay, tell me the answer. Well, for me, it was a c a a dot c plus a bar dot c bar plus a bar
dot c bar dot not c. Okay, I put it in the chat. Can you see the chat at least?
Can you all see the chat or not? Yes, yes, yes. Okay, so I have it. Please check your answers with
this. So what software got was a a dot c plus a bar dot c bar. Is it all of you get it?
I got three terms. You got three three different expressions. So three terms. Tell me your answer
namu. So a bar b bar plus a bar plus b bar. So a bar b bar plus b bar s b bar s b bar s b bar
how did you get class in between a bar plus b bar? No, just a bar times b bar.
So the first one is a bar dot b bar then plus b bar dot c bar plus b bar dot c bar then
plus a b c bar a b c bar.
This is what you have got. No, that's not correct. No, that's not correct.
So number was zero two five seven. The number was zero two. That mean two adjacent
corners else. So if you wrap them together, that will make one pair, right? So zero or two was
one and five seven. So five so only two pairs will be there. One is two extreme ends and one is
five and seven. I did say indexing wrong. I think you did the indexing wrong. That's why we are
I'm emphasizing that your first step is indexing and if you make a mistake in the indexing that
definitely you're going to be getting a zero marks in this question. So it's always zero one three
two zero one three two. How about others? Ricardo, you got an answer?
Ricardo, Thomas, Sarah.
Did anyone try and got any answer? It's okay, even if you did a mistake, no problem. But let me know
if you got the answer. Okay, is the chart still not accessible to you?
Can you still not access the chart? Yeah, I do kind of access the charts.
But why? Students can chat with teachers. Do you want me to reset all the charts?
One second, I have just, can you try now?
Is it working for you? Yeah, no, it's working. Okay, so now I'm not asking for the answer right now,
can you just say whether you have understood how we are simplifying Boolean expression using KMAP
or not? So say yes, if you have understood or say no, if you have not understood.
It's okay. I mean, it's a complex thing as both Mr Martin and I said, we are also learning
with you, so it's not easy. But at least did you learn the concept? Yes, somewhat, not really.
Okay, now I got the correct answer. Sarah got no, okay, somewhat. Fine, so we will do one thing.
I mean, this recording will be available to you and that YouTube video which I just played,
I will share that, let me share that right now, Rao. In fact, I will link that to the document
which is there in the PDF format. But let me also share it here so that you can keep this
for yourself and watch it once again. It's a very good video because I also learned from this
only today. So you can use this video to just go through it once again and our recording is also
available. I mean, it will be available in the same folder. So watch through this and next week,
we will start with a few assignments on KMAP just to look at what we learned today and then we will
continue from there. But just before you live, just let's have a look at what is covered in the
week number six so that we can actually start working on that as well. And one more important
thing I wanted to share with you, just give me a moment. So essentially, we are done with a 1.2.5
up to a 1.2.5. Can you see my screen? Yes, yes. Okay. So essentially, we have done up to a 1.2.5.
Now next week is operating system and control systems which is again very, very theoretical topic.
So this should take one lesson and then this translation only is for HL and then we are done with
this topic. So next week, we will finish this a 1.3 which is operating systems. But before that,
we will have a look at the KMAP again and maybe we will take up some examples of Boolean
simplification. What we will do is I will create a worksheet for you where I'll give you some
Boolean expression simplification, few logic get diagrams and few truth table problems.
So try to solve that over the week time. Next week, when we come, we will just start with that
discussion and then we will get onto this. I also shared with you one of the links of one website
for the programming practice. So if you look into your email that you may have received or the
announcements I think, you will see that I have shared one link with you which is actually a
self-taught tutorial for the programming. So for those who are new to Java programming,
because very soon we'll be starting with the theme B computational thinkin. I strongly recommend
that you start learning a little bit of programming using that link. It has step-by-step lessons
like starting from most fundamental concepts of what variables are, what literals are,
what is decision-making statement, what is looping statement. It's a very good tutorial and there
is a space where you can actually type your program and execute it on the same page. Okay.
So start learning that for those especially who are new to programming because once we start the
programming, we will have to follow a certain pace and if you don't know programming at all,
then you will be struggling a little bit. So it's my stronger advice that please start learning
programming right from now so that by the time we start, you will already be familiar with it.
Okay. Yes, Sarah, have a question. Where can I find the topic list that you had opened?
Have you recently joined Sarah? Yeah, I joined yesterday.
Yeah, I know. So you're new. So, Mr. Martin will be meeting you. Martin, have you fixed up
appointment with Sarah already? I scheduled some meetings for today earlier before
our meeting and for tomorrow. So, Sarah, you can look at the announcements. I saw the link,
but my name isn't on there and there's no option for me to put like, my name isn't listed,
so I can't really... Okay, so we need to add her name today. Okay, let me add you to that
list. Yeah, yeah. Okay. I've already added Sarah to the attendance list, so probably that's
why it's easier, but you're one meeting maybe you can add it there or maybe you'll have to meet Sarah
individually because she may have to be explained the catch-up plan for everything that we have done so
far. So Sarah, we have a folder whose link will be shared with you. I think Thomas,
you also Thomas is left, I think. So, Sarah, you will share... Sorry, Thomas is here. Thomas,
you all wrote that you need a link, right? Yeah, that was what I was going to ask about.
Yeah, so Thomas, I will share that link with you. Don't worry about that. And Sarah, you will
meet Mr. Martin, who will tell you what all we have covered and where you can find that content
list. Okay, he will also create a weekly plan for you so that week one you can cover
during the next week, then week two, then week three and week four, and simultaneously,
you will also be covering with whatever is going on with the current classes.
Okay, and is there any like assignments I have to submit now?
Yeah, there are some assignments, so you will do that week by week. So week one assignment,
you will finish over the next one week. So week five plus week one, you will finish together.
The next week, you will finish week two and week six like that.
Okay. All right, guys, thank you so much for staying here. I know it's a little confusing topic,
but by next week, I'm sure that we will have a lot more clarity. So just practice a few
example. It's not difficult. Namo, is it difficult?
No, I now understand it all. Yeah, software is it difficult?
No, it's not difficult. Okay, so this is just to motivate others that yes, it is doable.
It's quite possible. So it's quite simple actually. You know, if you just try to understand that
concept of pairing and disregarding the changing values, that's it. It's a just two step rule
that needs to be applied. So just try practicing a few problems and next week when we meet,
we will start with this game app and then we'll get under the operating systems. So thank you so
much. Thanks, Martin. I know you're not well, but thanks that you still stayed here also the class.
We'll meet next week. Bye, everyone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Martin. Yeah,
Mr. Bye. Bye.
